% hello
\input{../preamble.tex}



\makeglossaries
\input{../bussiness_glossary.tex}
\input{../data_mining_glossary.tex}

\begin{document}
\MyTitle{Bussiness Understanding Report}
\tableofcontents
\printglossary[type=bus]
\printglossary[type=dm]

\section{Main papers that will be used in this work}

\Gls{latex} is not cool. It never works.

A \gls{model} is a model.

\begin{itemize}
    \item the fluprint database paper \cite{tomicFluPRINTDatasetMultidimensional2019}
    \item other papers
\end{itemize}

\section{Influenza mortality papers}

\subsection{US mortality associated influenza abstract}
\cite{thompsonMortalityAssociatedInfluenza2003}
Context  Influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) cause substantial
morbidity and mortality. Statistical methods used to estimate deaths in the
United States attributable to influenza have not accounted for RSV circulation.

Objective  To develop a statistical model using national mortality and viral
surveillance data to estimate annual influenza- and RSV-associated deaths in
the United States, by age group, virus, and influenza type and subtype.

Design, Setting, and Population  Age-specific Poisson regression models using
national viral surveillance data for the 1976-1977 through 1998-1999 seasons
were used to estimate influenza-associated deaths. Influenza- and
RSV-associated deaths were simultaneously estimated for the 1990-1991 through
1998-1999 seasons.

Main Outcome Measures  Attributable deaths for 3 categories: underlying
pneumonia and influenza, underlying respiratory and circulatory, and all
causes.

Results  Annual estimates of influenza-associated deaths increased
significantly beween the 1976-1977 and 1998-1999 seasons for all 3 death
categories (P<.001 for each category). For the 1990-1991 through 1998-1999
seasons, the greatest mean numbers of deaths were associated with influenza
A(H3N2) viruses, followed by RSV, influenza B, and influenza A(H1N1). Influenza
viruses and RSV, respectively, were associated with annual means (SD) of 8097
(3084) and 2707 (196) underlying pneumonia and influenza deaths, 36 155 (11
055) and 11 321 (668) underlying respiratory and circulatory deaths, and 51 203
(15 081) and 17 358 (1086) all-cause deaths. For underlying respiratory and
circulatory deaths, 90\% of influenza- and 78\% of RSV-associated deaths occurred
among persons aged 65 years or older. Influenza was associated with more deaths
than RSV in all age groups except for children younger than 1 year. On average,
influenza was associated with 3 times as many deaths as RSV.

Conclusions  Mortality associated with both influenza and RSV circulation
disproportionately affects elderly persons. Influenza deaths have increased
substantially in the last 2 decades, in part because of aging of the
population, underscoring the need for better prevention measures, including
more effective vaccines and vaccination programs for elderly persons.

Influenza infections result in substantial morbidity and mortality nearly every
year1,2 and estimates of this burden have played a pivotal role in formulating
influenza vaccination policy in the United States.3 However, numbers of deaths
attributable to influenza are difficult to estimate directly because influenza
infections typically are not confirmed virologically or specified on hospital
discharge forms or death certificates. In addition, many influenza-associated
deaths occur from secondary complications when influenza viruses are no longer
detectable.4,5 Nonetheless, wintertime influenza epidemics have been shown to
be associated with increased hospitalizations and mortality for many diagnoses,
including congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,
pneumonia, and bacterial superinfections.6-9

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) epidemics often overlap with influenza
epidemics,8,10 and RSV infections have been associated with substantial
morbidity and mortality in young children and more recently in older
adults.10-14 Like influenza, RSV infections can precipitate both cardiac and
pulmonary complications.15-17 Respiratory syncytial virus infections are rarely
diagnosed in adults, in part because available rapid antigen-detection tests
are insensitive in adults and few tests for RSV are requested for this age
group by medical practitioners.16,18 It is likely that some deaths previously
attributed to influenza are actually associated with RSV infection.13,14,19

In this study, we provide age-specific estimates of deaths attributable to
influenza, by virus type and subtype, and to RSV using Poisson regression
models that incorporates national respiratory viral surveillance data. Recent
deliberations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
regarding influenza vaccination recommendations3 guided our choice of age
groups for these analyses.

\subsection{England influenza mortality}
\cite{greenMortalityAttributableInfluenza2013}
Very different influenza seasons have been observed from 2008/09-2011/12 in
England and Wales, with the reported burden varying overall and by age group.
The objective of this study was to estimate the impact of influenza on
all-cause and cause-specific mortality during this period. Age-specific
generalised linear regression models fitted with an identity link were
developed, modelling weekly influenza activity through multiplying clinical
influenza-like illness consultation rates with proportion of samples positive
for influenza A or B. To adjust for confounding factors, a similar activity
indicator was calculated for Respiratory Syncytial Virus. Extreme temperature
and seasonal trend were controlled for. Following a severe influenza season in
2008/09 in 65+yr olds (estimated excess of 13,058 influenza A all-cause
deaths), attributed all-cause mortality was not significant during the 2009
pandemic in this age group and comparatively low levels of influenza A
mortality were seen in post-pandemic seasons. The age shift of the burden of
seasonal influenza from the elderly to young adults during the pandemic
continued into 2010/11; a comparatively larger impact was seen with the same
circulating A(H1N1)pdm09 strain, with the burden of influenza A all-cause
excess mortality in 15–64 yr olds the largest reported during 2008/09–2011/12
(436 deaths in 15–44 yr olds and 1,274 in 45–64 yr olds). On average, 76\% of
seasonal influenza A all-age attributable deaths had a cardiovascular or
respiratory cause recorded (average of 5,849 influenza A deaths per season),
with nearly a quarter reported for other causes (average of 1,770 influenza A
deaths per season), highlighting the importance of all-cause as well as
cause-specific estimates. No significant influenza B attributable mortality was
detected by season, cause or age group. This analysis forms part of the
preparatory work to establish a routine mortality monitoring system ahead of
introduction of the UK universal childhood seasonal influenza vaccination
programme in 2013/14.

\subsection{Global mortality paper}
\cite{iulianoEstimatesGlobalSeasonal2018}
Background
Estimates of influenza-associated mortality are important for national and
international decision making on public health priorities. Previous estimates
of 250.000 500.000 annual influenza deaths are outdated. We updated the
estimated number of global annual influenza-associated respiratory deaths using
country-specific influenza-associated excess respiratory mortality estimates
from 1999–2015.
Methods
We estimated country-specific influenza-associated respiratory excess mortality
rates (EMR) for 33 countries using time series log-linear regression models
with vital death records and influenza surveillance data. To extrapolate
estimates to countries without data, we divided countries into three analytic
divisions for three age groups (<65 years, 65-74 years, and >=75 years) using
WHO Global Health Estimate (GHE) respiratory infection mortality rates. We
calculated mortality rate ratios (MRR) to account for differences in risk of
influenza death across countries by comparing GHE respiratory infection
mortality rates from countries without EMR estimates with those with estimates.
To calculate death estimates for individual countries within each age-specific
analytic division, we multiplied randomly selected mean annual EMRs by the
country's MRR and population. Global 95\% credible interval (CrI) estimates were
obtained from the posterior distribution of the sum of country-specific
estimates to represent the range of possible influenza-associated deaths in a
season or year. We calculated influenza-associated deaths for children younger
than 5 years for 92 countries with high rates of mortality due to respiratory
infection using the same methods.
Findings
EMR-contributing countries represented 57\% of the global population. The
estimated mean annual influenza-associated respiratory EMR ranged from 0.1 to
6.4 per 100.000 individuals for people younger than 65 years, 2.9 to 44.0 per
100.000 individuals for people aged between 65 and 74 years, and 17.9 to 223.5
per 100.000 for people older than 75 years. We estimated that 291 243–645 832
seasonal influenza-associated respiratory deaths (4.0–8.8 per 100.000
individuals) occur annually. The highest mortality rates were estimated in
sub-Saharan Africa (2.8–16.5 per 100 000 individuals), southeast Asia (3.5-9.2
per 100.000 individuals), and among people aged 75 years or older (51.3-99.4
per 100.000 individuals). For 92 countries, we estimated that among children
younger than 5 years, 9243-105 690 influenza-associated respiratory deaths
occur annually.
Interpretation
These global influenza-associated respiratory mortality estimates are higher
than previously reported, suggesting that previous estimates might have
underestimated disease burden. The contribution of non-respiratory causes of
death to global influenza-associated mortality should be investigated.

\section{Vaccine success criteria}
\cite{zhouHospitalizationsAssociatedInfluenza2012}

Background. Age-specific comparisons of influenza and respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV) hospitalization rates can inform prevention efforts, including
vaccine development plans. Previous US studies have not estimated jointly the
burden of these viruses using similar data sources and over many seasons.

Methods. We estimated influenza and RSV hospitalizations in 5 age categories
(<1, 1–4, 5–49, 50–64, and >=65 years) with data for 13 states from 1993–1994
through 2007–2008. For each state and age group, we estimated the contribution
of influenza and RSV to hospitalizations for respiratory and circulatory
disease by using negative binomial regression models that incorporated weekly
influenza and RSV surveillance data as covariates.

Results. Mean rates of influenza and RSV hospitalizations were 63.5 (95\%
confidence interval [CI], 37.5–237) and 55.3 (95\% CI, 44.4–107) per 100000
person-years, respectively. The highest hospitalization rates for influenza
were among persons aged >=65 years (309/100000; 95\% CI, 186–1100) and those aged
<1 year (151/100000; 95\% CI, 151–660). For RSV, children aged <1 year had the
highest hospitalization rate (2350/100000; 95\% CI, 2220–2520) followed by those
aged 1–4 years (178/100000; 95\% CI, 155–230). Age-standardized annual rates per
100000 person-years varied substantially for influenza (33–100) but less for
RSV (42–77).

Conclusions. Overall US hospitalization rates for influenza and RSV are
similar; however, their age-specific burdens differ dramatically. Our estimates
are consistent with those from previous studies focusing either on influenza or
RSV. Our approach provides robust national comparisons of hospitalizations
associated with these 2 viral respiratory pathogens by age group and over time.


\bibliographystyle{unsrt}
\bibliography{../references.bib}
\end{document}
